Needless to say, having a cell phone is convenient. I didn't need to
completely avoid using one to realize this; however, after one year of
abstinence I can say that this convenience comes at a cost, one I'm
still not ready to put up with.

# Constant access to technology

First of all, cell phones provide technology at your fingertips at any
moment, this might look like a good thing, but it actually isn't. In
the last year I got rid of many annoying and rude behaviors and bad
habits caused by this constant access to technology. Here are a few
examples:

## The web

0. Common situation: you are talking to your friends, and suddenly a question arises: when did this happen? Who did that? Where did he go? Most of the time nobody cares about the answer to this question, the discussion simply moves on; but there is always someone that has to look things up on the web and interrupt the natural course of the conversation to tell you when it happened, who actually did it, where he went.

0. Being able to look everything up on the spot also takes away the need to figure things out on your own, which is an important skill, if you ask me. e.g. there is no need to look up where the nearest bar is: just walk around the city block and you'll find it. When travelling, I often tried to remember every turn needed to go from A to B and got lost, but this only happened the first time: now I know where to go, and I also know many interesting places close to B.

0. Don't look at the screen all day. I don't know what's so important about a cat playing the piano but I can guarantee you that the real everyday world is probably more important than that.

## Music

Since I got rid of my phone I stopped listening to music when I'm
traveling. This simple habit is everything but innocuous: walking
around focused on something that isn't the world around you is both
dangerous and a real waste. Just by giving your ears the chance to
listen to what happens around you, you let your mind free to wander
and notice every funny, weird or interesting aspect of the present
moment. This might look a little naive, but it's really astonishing
how many inputs the world gives us, we can't just waste them to
listen to our favorite song with half an ear.

## Careless organization

Being able to communicate at any moment remotely encourages *careless
organization*. There is no need to be on time if you can just send a
text message saying "I'm late", there is no need to agree on where to
meet if you can just send me your location when you get there; when I
go out with my friends this bites me every time. I only have access to
the web when I'm at home, so I can never be updated about last-minute
changes to the plan. On the other hand, when I need to organise I try
to think about every possible variable beforehand, because I know I
won't be able to adapt my plans on the fly.

# Social connections

After one year without a phone I noticed that my friendships have
radically changed. Nowadays most social interactions take place on the
internet, using some chat service like Whatsapp, Telegram or some
other social network. I don't use any of those: I use
[XMPP](https://xmpp.org) and e-mail. Trying to take my friends away
from Whatsapp is already a hard task, but making them realise that
it's just impossible for me to have *real-time* communications is
hopeless. I don't have access to the internet when I'm travelling, I
don't have my computer on all day, so if you are lucky I will reply
within a couple of hours, if you aren't it will take me the whole day.

Most of my friendships survived the change, some didn't, but all of
them changed: the most important interactions no longer take place on
the internet nor mediated by technology. If I need to talk to someone
my first option is always meeting them, this was not the case a couple
of years ago.

Some of my friends still don't understand my choice, and think I just
want to make their lives harder by not being in all of their Whatsapp
groups, most of which are redundant and worthless when it comes to
organization (see the previous point).

# Conclusion

Last year changed me radically as a person: I learned a lot and
changed the way I approach everyday life. Not every change is
completely positive, I admit some of my friends still don't understand
or approve my choice and this caused some friction.

What makes me sure about my choice is that my primary concern is not
convenience, I think this is really important to understand. In these
lines I've only addressed practical consequences of my choice because
most of the critiques I get happen to be focused on this aspect, but
this is not the only, nor the most important, parameter by which I
judge this last year.
